---
layout: distill
title: frequently forgotten git commands
description: A collection of links and guides for getting out of all sorts of git trouble.
date: 2023-01-09
categories: code
published: true

authors:
  - name: Nasib Naimi
    affiliations:
      name: ETH Zurich

# bibliography: 2018-12-22-distill.bib

# Optionally, you can add a table of contents to your post.
# NOTES:
#   - make sure that TOC names match the actual section names
#     for hyperlinks within the post to work correctly.
#   - we may want to automate TOC generation in the future using
#     jekyll-toc plugin (https://github.com/toshimaru/jekyll-toc).
toc:
  - name: rebase or merge?
  - name: .gitignore
  - name: removing last commit and rewriting history (careful!)
  - name: revert unstaged changes
  - name: revert single file back to specific commit or HEAD
  - name: git diff a file between commits
  - name: an unsung hero; git submodules
  - name: pre- and post-commit hooks

# Below is an example of injecting additional post-specific styles.
# If you use this post as a template, delete this _styles block.
_styles: >
  .fake-img {
    background: #bbb;
    border: 1px solid rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    box-shadow: 0 0px 4px rgba(0, 0, 0, 0.1);
    margin-bottom: 12px;
  }
  .fake-img p {
    font-family: monospace;
    color: white;
    text-align: left;
    margin: 12px 0;
    text-align: center;
    font-size: 16px;
  }

---


## rebase or merge?

_in progress_

## .gitignore

[setup a gitignore file](https://www.atlassian.com/git/tutorials/saving-changes/gitignore)

## removing last commit and rewriting history (careful!)

Use the reset command. First undo the local commit 

{% highlight bash %} git reset HEAD^ {% endhighlight %}

Then, force push the reverted local commit to the remote git repository with

{% highlight bash %} git push origin +HEAD {% endhighlight %}

**Note:** This will overwrite the commits that you reverted and they will no longer exist.

## revert unstaged changes
<a href="https://stackoverflow.com/questions/52704/how-do-i-discard-unstaged-changes-in-git">source</a>

For all unstaged files in current working directory use:

{% highlight bash %}
git restore .
{% endhighlight %}

For a specific file use:

{% highlight bash %}
git restore path/to/file/to/revert
{% endhighlight %}

That together with git switch replaces the overloaded git checkout, and thus removes the argument disambiguation.

If a file has both staged and unstaged changes, only the unstaged changes shown in git diff are reverted. Changes shown in git diff --staged stay intact.

## revert single file back to specific commit or HEAD
reset both the working copy and the state in the Git index to that of HEAD:

{% highlight bash %}
git checkout HEAD -- my-file.txt
{% endhighlight %}

[source](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/7147270/hard-reset-of-a-single-file)

## git diff a file between commits
From the git-diff manpage:

git diff [--options] <commit> <commit> [--] [<path>...]
For instance, to see the difference for a file "main.c" between now and two commits back, here are three equivalent commands:

{% highlight bash %}
git diff HEAD^^ HEAD main.c
git diff HEAD^^..HEAD -- main.c
git diff HEAD~2 HEAD -- main.c
{% endhighlight %}

[source](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/3338126/how-do-i-diff-the-same-file-between-two-different-commits-on-the-same-branch)

## an unsung hero; git submodules

[source](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Tools-Submodules)

## pre- and post-commit hooks

With Git, you can trigger custom scripts through certain actions. These actions are grouped into two different sets of hooks: client- and server-side. Client-side hooks are triggered by commiting, merging, etc. while server-side hooks run on network operations (e.g. receiving pushed commits).

hooks are stored under *.git/hooks*, which is automatically populated with some hooks when initializing git repo with *git init*. Hooks can be written with any language (ruby, python, etc.) so long as they are in properly named and executable scripts. 

Enable a hook script by putting it in a file in the hooks subdirectory, naming it appropriately (no extensions!), and making it executable. After that, it will be called when ever the corresponding triggering action is performed. For a list of all major hook filenames, check the source below.

**pre-commit** hooks are often part of a proper workflow to ensure that nothing is overlooked when commiting. Pre-commit hooks can check whether e.g. the code is properly formatted, the linter succeeds, and/or all test cases pass. Note that the pre-commit hook can be bypassed using *git commit --no-verify*. A nice framework for managing/maintaining pre-commit hooks is provided by pre-commit(check links). After installing the framework, create a file named *.pre-commit-config.yaml* and configure the hook as you please. An example config file for python projects:

{% highlight yaml %}
fail_fast: true
repos:
  - repo: https://github.com/psf/black
    rev: 22.10.0
    hooks:
      - id: black
  - repo: https://github.com/PyCQA/flake8
    rev: 5.0.4
    hooks:
      - id: flake8
        args: ["--max-line-length=89", "--ignore=E731,W503,E203"]
  - repo: https://github.com/pre-commit/mirrors-mypy
    rev: "v0.982"
    hooks:
      - id: mypy
{% endhighlight %}

and install the hook using 

{% highlight bash %}
pre-commit install
{% endhighlight %}

hooks are great.

[pre-commit](https://pre-commit.com/)
[source](https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Customizing-Git-Git-Hooks)
